---
title: Take (and the interrogative 'aha')
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, interrogative]
---
Take means: Reason, cause.

You can use 'take' in a question with the question word 'aha' to ask "why" or enquire about the reason for something::
- He aha te take i wehe atu rātou? (Why did they leave? What is the reason for their leaving?)
- He aha te take o tāna karere? (What was the reason for his message? [Using the kupu karere from earlier this week])

Yes/no questions in te reo Māori can be formed by altering the intonation of a statement (or in writing using a question mark):
- He kaputī māu? (Do you want a cup of tea?)
- He kaputī māu. (A cup of tea for you.)

If you want to know a new piece of information, you can use an interrogative. In English, these are words like what, which, when, where, who, whom, whose, why, whether and how. Te reo Māori uses words such as aha, wai, hia, hea, nahea, pēhea, tēhea for this same purpose. In a lot of sentences, you can simply replace the question word with the answer to create the sentence that answers the question.

The kupu 'aha' can be used in place of a noun or a verb to ask questions such as:
- He aha tēnei? (What is this?) / He kaputī tēnā (That is a cup of tea.)
- Kei te aha koe? (What are you doing?) / Kei te inu au. (I'm drinking.)
- Kei te inu koe i te aha? (What are you drinking) / Kei te inu au i te kaputī (I'm drinking the cup of tea.)
- Me titiro ki te aha? (What should we look at?)
- Me aha tātou ināianei (What should we do now?)

"He aha te take..." is one way to ask about the reason for something. Other ways to ask "why" using 'aha' include:
- Nā te aha koutou i noho ai ki te kāinga? (Why did you stay home?)
- He aha koutou i noho ai ki te kāinga? (Why did you stay home?)

I'm not going to deep dive on this construction in this post, because there's a lot to say about the particle 'ai', but this expression can also be shortened to "he aha ai?" as the standalone question "why?"
