---
title: Hapori (and the interrogatives 'pēhea' and 'hea')
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, interrogative, hea, pēhea]
---
Hapori means: Community, neighbourhood.

The example sentence for hapori on Te Aka is "I pēwhea te reo i tēnei hapori i a koe e tupu ana?" (What was the language like in this community when you were growing up?)

This uses the question word 'pēhea/pēwhea' (how, what like). Most learners are introduced to this kupu in the sentence "kei te pēhea koe?" (how are you?). An earlier post covered the question word, or interrogative, [aha]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2024-05-31-take %})

Some examples of other pēhea questions include:
- I pēhea te pēne? (What was the band like?)
  - I pai te pēne (The band was good)
- I titiro pēhea atu ia ki a koe? (How did he look at you?)
- I pēhea te tunu kai i ngā wā o mua atu i te hiko? (How did people cook their food before there was electricity?)
- He pēhea te pikitia rā? (What was the film like?)

An interesting thing about pēhea is that it's composed of 'pē-' ('like' - also found in pēnei [like this], pēnā [like that], pērā [like that over there]) and other question word 'hea' which on its own means "where/what place" or "what time".

Hea functions as a locative noun and sits in the same part of speech as a place name.
- Kei hea te Whare Wānanga o Waikato? (Where is the University of Waikato?)
- Kei Kirikiriroa (In Hamilton)
- Kei Kirikiriroa te Whare Wānanga o Waikato. (The university of Waikato is in Hamilton)

It can also be preceded by the preposition ā to ask questions about the time of future events.
- Āhea te hui? (When is the hui?)
- Āhea koe haere ai? (When are you going?)

To ask about the time of a past event, you would use 'nahea'.
- Nō nahea rātou i wehe atu ai? (When did they leave?)
