---
title: Kāinga (and possessive pronouns)
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, possessive, a-o category, possessive pronoun]
---
Kāinga means: Home, home turf, village.

Te Aka's example sentence for kāinga is "I whānau au ki Nūhaka, Hāki Pei, i te 10 o ngā rā o Maramarima, tau 1904, i tō mātau kāinga e pātata atu ana ki te awa o Nūhaka" (I was born at Nūhaka, Hawkes Bay, on the 10th May, 1904, at our home close to the Nūhaka River.)

This example sentence uses "tō mātau kāinga" where "tō mātau" is a tūkapi riro (possessive pronoun) using the pronoun "mātau" (eastern dialect variation of mātou [we, us, three or more people]). The tūkapi riro is formed by prepending a pūriro (possessive particle) to a tūkapi or tūpou (pronoun). As mentioned earlier, the singular tūpou take a special form when use in this way:
- au becomes the suffix -ku
- koe becomes the suffix -u
- ia becomes the suffix -na

For each pronoun, I'll list out the tūkapi riro takitahi (singular possessive pronoun) and the tūkapi riro takitini (plural possessive pronoun). Note that these possessive pronouns have two types of "plurality": whether the thing being possessed is plural and whether the thing doing the possessing is plural.

For example:
- In "āku tamariki" (my children) there is one of me and multiple children.
- In "tā mātou tamaiti" (our child) there are multiple of us and one child.

So to go through each tūkapi:
- au is our tūkapi kiritūnei takitahi (singular first person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "au" are "taku, tāku, tōku" (neutral, a, o).
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "au" are "aku, āku, ōku" (neutral, a, o).
- koe is our tūkapi kiritūnā takitahi (singular second person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "koe" are "tō, tāu, tōu" (neutral, a, o).
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "koe" are "ō, āu, ōu" (neutral, a, o).
- ia is our tūkapi kiritūrā takitahi (singular third person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "ia" are "tana, tāna, tōna" (neutral, a, o).
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "ia" are "ana, āna, ōna" (neutral, a, o).
- māua is our tūkapi kaupare kiritūnei takirua (dual first person exclusive pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "māua" are "tā māua, tō māua".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "māua" are "ā māua, ō māua"
- tāua is our tūkapi kauawhi kiritūnei takirua (dual first person inclusive pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "tāua" are "tā tāua, tō tāua".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "tāua" are "ā tāua, ō tāua".
- kōrua is our tūkapi kiritūnā takirua (dual second person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "kōrua" are "tā kōrua, tō kōrua".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "kōrua" are "ā kōrua, ō kōrua".
- rāua is our tūkapi kiritūrā takirua (dual third person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "rāua" are "tā rāua, tō rāua".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "rāua" are "ā rāua, ō rāua".
- mātou is our tūkapi kaupare kiritūnei takitini (plural first person exclusive pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "mātou" are "tā mātou, tō mātou".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "mātou" are "ā mātou, ō mātou".
- tātou is our tūkapi kauawhi kiritūnei takitini (plural first person inclusive pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "tātou" are "tā tātou, tō tātou".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "tātou" are "ā tātou, ō tātou".
- koutou is our tūkapi kiritūnā takitini (plural second person pronoun).
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "koutou" are "tā koutou, tō koutou".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "koutou" are "ā koutou, ō koutou".
- rātou is our tūkapi kiritūrā takitini (plural third person pronoun)
  - The tūkapi riro takitahi for "rātou" are "tā rātou, tō rātou".
  - The tūkapi riro takitini for "rātou" are "ā rātou, ō rātou".
 
  If you wanted to say that something was owned by Mere, you would use "tā Mere", "tō Mere", "ā Mere" or "ō Mere". If you wanted to say that something was owned by "the teacher" you would use "tā te kaiako", "tō te kaiako", "ā te kaiako" or "ō te kaiako".
