---
title: Karere (and 'he' sentences, object incorporation and the passive construction)
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, object incorporation, passive, indefinite phrase, classifying sentence]
---
Karere means: Message or news.

kupu.maori.nz gives "He karere māu" (there is a message for you) as an example sentence for this kupu, highlighting that this is a "classifying sentence" which I'm using as a prompt for today's post.

The determiner 'he' is a preposed particle which is used to introduce indefinite phrases and classifying sentences.

An indefinite phrase introduces a noun without referring to a specific instance of that noun, for example:
- he kiore (a rat or some rats, the speaker isn't referring to any specific rats, just to rats in general)
- te kiore (the rat)
- ngā kiore (the rats)
- tētahi kiore (a certain rat, the speaker has one in mind, but isn't elaborating)
- ētahi kiore (some rats, the speaker has specific rats in mind, but isn't elaborating)

An important property of the 'he' particle is that it can't follow a preposition (including 'i' or 'ki') which means it can't function as the object in a reremahi (active sentence):
- Ka whai te ngeru i te kiore āpōpō (The cat will chase the rat tomorrow)

We can't make this into 'he kiore' because it follows the 'i' joiner, so if we want to say that the cat is going to chase a non-specific rat, there are two other constructions we can use. We can use object incorporation to essentially create a new verb "whai kiore" (rat chasing) allowing us to say:
- Ka whai kiore te ngeru āpōpō. (The cat will be chasing rats tomorrow.)

Alternatively, we can use the passive construction to make the sentence about the rat(s):
- Ka whāia e te ngeru he kiore āpōpō. (A/some rat(s) will be chased by the cat tomorrow)

In an active sentence, the agent (doer) of the action is the subject phrase and the patient (target) of the action is the object, marked by i/ki. 

Because a passive sentence takes the patient as its subject, that patient can be a 'he' noun phrase because it's not introduced by i/ki. 

In a passive sentence the subject phrase would generally come before the agent phrase, but they can occur in any order and putting the subject last is common if it's a 'he' phrase. An example of the more common order is:
- Ka whāia te kiore e te ngeru āpōpō (The rat will be chased by the cat tomorrow)

I won't cover classifying sentences in detail, but since they're how I landed on this topic, I'll close it out by mentioning this other use of 'he' briefly.

A classifying sentence states something (called the predicate) about the subject of the sentence. In these simple classifying sentences I'll mark the predicate with [] and the subject with ():
- [He makariri] (a waho) - It's cold outside.
- [He rangatira] (a Hēmi) - Hēmi is a chief.
- [He pukapuka] (tēnei) - This is a book
- [He māhana] (tēnei waina) - This wine is warm
