---
title: Tono (and using 'tonu' in negative sentences)
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, particle, postposed periphery, tonu, negative]
---
Tono means: To send, to apply for.

"Tono" popped in an example sentence I was studying the other day:

- E kore tonu au e tono i te mahi rā, ahakoa pēhea te nui o te utu. Ehara ko te moni te mea nui. (My understanding of the translation: I will never apply for that job, no matter how much it pays. Money is not the most important thing.)

I was studying this sentence in combination with:
- Kīhai tonu mātou i mōhio (We definitely didn't know - tonu intensifies the negation here).

I've been looking at these two sentences for a couple of reasons. The first of which is that they're using negating constructions that I haven't learned yet. I've mainly negated verbal sentences with "kāore" and sentences with noun phrases using "ehara". Harlow's grammar notes that 'kīhai' is not often used, but can be used to negate verb phrases introduced with the past tense 'i'. "E kore... e" is described by Te Aka as a strong future negative "will not".

The main reason I've been looking at these sentences is that they're examples of situations where the particle 'tonu' follows the negative word instead of following the verb. The particle 'tonu' roughly translates to 'still' as in:
- Kei te moe tonu ia (He is still sleeping)

Tonu is primarily a postposed particle, which means it comes after the nucleus of the sentence. In a verbal sentence, it generally follows the verb directly. However, the online learning platform which is used for my mahi kāinga included some sentences above the level I'm currently studying at which I've been looking to understand better:
- Kāore tonu tāua e haere? (We will still not go?)
- Kāore tonu a Mere i te waiata i te waiata? (Mere is still not singing the song?)
- Kāore tonu a Māmā i hoko i ētahi hua rākau? (Mum still did not buy some fruit?)
- Kāore anō a Māmā kia tunu tonu i te kai o te pō? (Mum still has not yet cooked dinner?)
- Kāore tonu ia e moe ana? (She is still not sleeping?)

In each of these examples, tonu moves to follow the negative word (unless another particle follows it, as with "kāore ano" used to negate a "kua" sentence.) In the grammars I have, I haven't been able to identify the rules for when/how the particle might move to follow 'kāore' but samples of reo Māori text online suggest it's a common construction. The sentences using "e kore... e" and "kīhai" above are from the pukapuka He Iti Kahurangi which I'm going to pick up a copy of from the library to study further.

All that to say: The point of today's post is "here's a thing it seems like you can do in te reo Māori which I don't entirely understand yet, but which is good to know when reading reo Māori texts".
