---
title: Huritau (and wrapping up phrase review)
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, phrase]
---
Huritau means: Birthday, Anniversary.

I really like the kupu huritau, because you get the gist of what it's about from its components "huri" (to turn, go around) and "tau" (year) giving a really nice vibe of the turning of the years. As a noun it can mean "anniversary" or "birthday" but it can also be used as a modifer to mean something that recurs annually, as in the Te Aka example sentence:
- Ka haria taua tono ki a Kuīni Wikitōria i te haerenga o te ope hōia Māori ki te whakanui i tōna hui huritau ono tekau (That request was taken to Queen Victoria when the the Māori contingent of soldiers travelled to celebrate her diamond jubilee.)

This is a nice long sentence to wrap up the phrase breakdown exercise I was doing over the weekend. This sentence is made up of the following phrases (with nucleus and peripheries separated):
- [Ka] [haria] [∅] -- haria - to take, carry.
- [taua] [tono] [∅] -- tono - request.
- [ki a] [Kuīni Wikitōria] [∅]
- [i te] [haerenga] [∅] -- haerenga - trip, journey.
- [o te] [ope hōia Māori] [∅] -- ope - contingent.
- [ki te] [whakanui] [∅] -- whakanui - to celebrate
- [i tōna] [hui huritau ono tekau] [∅] 

Because it was a busy weekend of these, I haven't broken down each phrase in too much detail, but just highlighted the key bases in each and the meaning of the particle can be inferred from the full sentence.

Then I'll repeat that exercise to illustrate how each phrase builds on the earlier ones.

- Ka haria -- passive sentence, meaning that the subject is being carried, but what is the subject?
- taua tono -- the subject is "that request" (taua refers to "that" - something that was established earlier in the text), but who was the request carried to?
- ki a Kuīni Wikitōria -- to Queen Victoria. The sentence could stop here, but the writer decides to expand on when this happened.
- i te haerenga -- this happened at the same time as a journey, whose journey was it?
- o te ope hōia Māori -- of the contingent of Māori soldiers
- ki te whakanui -- this establishes the purpose of the previous two phrases, the journey of the Māori soldiers took place in order to celebrate something, but what was it aiming to celebrate?
- i tōna hui huritau ono tekau -- the celebration was of "her 60th annual hui" where who "her" is can be established from context as being Queen Victoria.
