---
title: Inapō (and 'nō te')
layout: post
tags: [daily reo, n-m possession]
---
Inapō means: Last night.

The example sentence on Te Aka for inapō is:
- Kei te ngenge au. Kāore i pai taku moe inapō, he ngongoro nō te ihu o taku tāne. (I'm tired. I didn't sleep well last night because my husband snored.)

This sentence uses the construction "nō te" which it translates as "because". Te Aka's translation of this construction is "when, it was because, at the time that, from the time that, until, on account of, owing to - usually followed by a derived noun" illustrating that it has a slightly complex use.

My interpretation of this is that the particle "nō" here is the same as the [possessive particle]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2024-05-14-he-kawhe-māu %}) "nō"  rather than being a [homophone]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2024-04-19-pōuri %}). I'm not entirely convinced of this position and I'm travelling at the moment, so I don't have access to all of my textbooks (I only took "Let's learn Maori" by Bruce Biggs with me) so this is something for ongoing study. Nā/Nō have meanings related to "belonging to" but it seems like a natural extension of that to use them to mean "owing to" in the same way that "mō" is used to mean "about, concerning" and "mā" is used to mean "by way of". Similarly nā/nō appear in the construction "na reira"/"no reira" (therefore... so...).

Some examples of the use of nō te as 'when' include:
- Nō te taenga ki te raumati, ka mahana te kiri o te tangata (When summer arrived people began to feel warm)
- Nō te ahiahi ka haere a Whakatau (Whakatau left in the evening)

Bruce Biggs uses "nō te... ai" for because although this requirement isn't noted in Te Aka, so I'm curious whether it's a more traditional construction:
- Nō te katanga a Tīwaiwaka i a Māui i kūtia ai e Hine-nui-te-pō ā mate ana. (It was because Fantail laughed at Māui that [he] was crushed by Hine-nui-te-pō and died)

That's an initial intro to nō te, but there's some additional detail I need to look into to better understand this construction when I've got all my textbooks available, so I'll expand on nō te tomorrow.
